:title: projects
:date: 2010-11-24 13:49
:slug: 42-projects

Must.. write.. more. I'm trying to get over the temptation to rewrite my blog
software again (probably using `Jekyll <https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/>`__).
My blog-yak-shaving process works like this: "Oh, here's an interesting idea,
I should blog about it. But my blog software is kind of annoying, I should
really rewrite it first. Maybe I'll do it in git this time. (/me goes to
start rewriting it). Oh, look, it's already in git, I guess I've been over
this before. Hm, what other ways might I put off actually writing english
instead of python?".

Anyways. A few things of note from the last year:

* my day job has me working on `Jetpack
  <https://github.com/mozilla/addon-sdk>`__, an SDK to make it easier/safer
  to build add-ons for Firefox (and other Mozilla applications)
* `node.js <http://nodejs.org/>`__ is looking interesting: like Twisted for
  Javascript
* I still hack on `Tahoe-LAFS <http://tahoe-lafs.org/>`__ each day on the
  train.
* `Bitcoin <http://www.bitcoin.org/>`__ is my new fascination, a
  decentralized cryptographically-backed currency
* I use Git everywhere I can.
* `Foolscap <http://foolscap.lothar.com/>`__ is still going strong. I've got
  a hack to let you push/pull Git over a FURL, but now that Git has
  "git-remote-helpers" support, I need to rewrite that hack.
* My coworker Atul has a project named `Pydermonkey
  <http://www.toolness.com/wp/?p=678>`__ which is a Python binding for the
  SpiderMonkey JS engine. I want to tie this into either Foolscap or Tahoe,
  to create a safe-remote-code-execution environment. I'm still trying to
  sort out how it ought to work (in particular, starting with what it might
  be good for).

