:title: sparkfun toys
:date: 2007-07-20 18:46
:category: hardware
:slug: 33-sparkfun-toys

I was thumbing through some of my old `del.icio.us
<http://del.icio.us/warner>`__ bookmarks today, and came across `sparkfun
electronics <http://sparkfun.com>`__ again. Man, their coolness doubles in
size every six months. $25 for a half-inch square self-contained `radio data
link <http://www.sparkfun.com/commerce/product_info.php?products_id=152#>`__,
serial interface that you can run with a microcontroller, 3V, built-in
antenna. Wow. $6 for a white Luxeon 1W LED ($8 for 3W, $25 for 5W). $5 for a
1W Luxeon that's TWO FRIGGING MILLIMETERS on a side. Holy crap.

And $20 for a color LCD like the ones from a cellphone. And speaking of
cellphones, $184 gets you a quad-band cellphone module with a GPS receiver,
camera driver, and a python interpreter. Add an antenna, a battery, a serial
port, and a SIM card, and you've got a mobile data node. And I think you can
even get prepaid SIM cards that can be topped-off online.

(note to self, places like `this
<http://www.myworldphone.com/prepaidsim.html>`__ sell such cards, generally 5
to 20 cents per minute, which can be recharged with scratch-off coupons. And
it looks like you can buy them from retail cellphone shops too. They all come
with a phone number.. no wonder the phone numberspace is getting so crowded,
you can buy them from vending machines in some countries..)

Each time I visit these folks (or browse through the digikey catalog, or just
look through my old notebooks), I feel such a strong drive to build
something. The delay involved in actually getting the parts usually means I
don't get around to doing it. But maybe if I just keep buying stuff and
stocking my workbench then the next time I'm in a construction mood I'll have
everything I need already at hand and I can just start soldering away...
